[MUSIC PLAYING]
[PANTING]
[CLOCK TICKING]
>>Most of us today
are feeling rushed.
We feel like time is after us.
We're behind schedule.
We're trying to catch up.
And of course, all of
that is in our own mind.
Time is an illusion
that we create.
It's something created
by our nervous system.
So we also have the
power to experience
the beautiful feeling of having
all the time in the world.
>>We spend so much time trying
to be so right about so little.
Right now, my next
words, my next actions,
is it going to come from
defending this little piece
that I think is right?
Or am I going to
dance a bigger dance?
>>The world is more complex.
And we can make another
evolutionary leap.
>>We are so powerful and have
so little belief in ourselves.
You know, what people are
afraid of is not their shadow.
They're afraid of their light.
>>People think that as you get
older, you just fall apart.
That falling apart is a
function of our mindsets.
>>If I'm sick, I
go to the doctor.
If I break my arm,
I go to the doctor.
But if I break my heart,
I go to the dance floor.
Because we have been raised so
separate, thinking one thing,
feeling another,
and doing a third,
movement then becomes medicine.
>>Speaking, teaching,
parenting doesn't matter.
It's all the same.
Our greatest joy and our
greatest satisfaction
always comes when we're
functioning in the moment.
>>It will shift entirely
how you actually operate.
>>It's only a matter of
opening the mind from "it's
impossible" to "it's possible."
>>See, people can do this.
But they don't.
>>I choose to be happy.
And that's what
my life lesson is.
Choose to be happy.
>>Putting everything of
yourself into something
and knowing that
everyone else is
putting in just as much
effort as you is probably
when I felt most alive.
Yeah.
>>So I'm 66.
And I never thought I would
be this happy at age 66.
>>I think I am a
very fortunate guy.
>>When you're young, you don't
like to think about being old.
>>I don't take all the credit.
I don't think it's good living
or reading the right books.
>>If you have an opportunity
to do it and the resources
and the time available
to do it, do it.
Because tomorrow
might not be here.
>>Go with it.
Move with it.
Join in it.
>>Almost invariably,
it is the help
that you get for yourself
that is the most useful.
And I think that's
a lesson that's
become more and
more true for me.
>>Come on, come on, come on.
Come on.
>>We've all been conditioned
by a pretty toxic society based
on fear and domination
and competitiveness.
[PHONE VIBRATING]
>>Hello?
Yeah.
Yeah, I know.
Yeah, I'll be there soon.
I'm on my way in.
I'm getting there
as fast as possible.
I know.
I'm stuck at a light.
>>Most people, because
they're in the battle,
they're in the battle daily.
We're constantly feeling
certain feelings we don't like.
We're thinking thoughts
that are negative,
that affect how we feel
and affect what we do.
So we're constantly
in this battle.
>>The anxiety that we
feel is really a sign
that we're disconnected
from ourselves,
we're disconnected
from the earth,
from each other.
>>It's very stressful to
pretend to be somebody else.
Some fabrications, some
inheritance, some idea,
some concept of a
self-- it's come
from somewhere outside
of us, some expectation
that we have to live up to.
This is really breaking us down.
>>Science tells us that
80% to 90% of our thoughts
are the same thoughts we had
yesterday and the day before.
So if we're thinking
the same old thoughts,
we're probably going to end
up feeling the same old way
and doing the same
old behaviors.
Gandhi said a beautiful thing.
Gandhi said that I never let
anybody walk through my mind
with dirty feet.
Think about how
profound that is,
that we actually need
to start making choices
about what thoughts
we want to entertain.
>>Go back in your past.
Go back.
I bet you have a friend that
you were very close with,
and you knew your
friend behavior.
And you happen to know
your friend's parent.
And at some point, you saw that
your friend and their parent
shared the same behavior.
So you volunteer.
You go, hey, you know Bill,
you're just like your dad.
We're all Bill.
And this is what
it means is Bill
was the only one that couldn't
see his subconscious behaviors,
because they're automatic.
And
So 95% of my life, I'm running
the subconscious programs.
And if I ever had parents
or a community that
instilled limiting beliefs
into me, then 95% of the day
I am unknowingly playing
those limiting beliefs.
>>Quite often, we have one
foot on the accelerator
and one foot on the brake.
>>No.
No.
>>So some unconscious
behaviors are the ones
that we were programmed
with in the first six
years of our lives.
These are the ones that gave us
limitations of what we could do
and what we couldn't do.
>>We often think we
have to add something,
that we're going to be happier
if we get a better back end.
We're going to be happier
if we get a bigger house.
But the fact is that
those inner obstacles that
are getting in the way of
our enjoyment, fulfillment,
learning, performance,
they're there.
And a bigger house
and a better back end
doesn't change that at all.
>>One of the big questions in
my life as a young man was,
why am I feeling this
sense of unease in my body?
Why do I always have
to be doing something?
Why can't I sit
quietly with myself?
And I began to understand
that the real problem was
this mind-body split, that
somehow the conditioning that I
had gotten in my life had
separated my mind from my body.
Which is a terrible
state of affairs,
since I'm really this unity.
I'm this wholeness.
>>We tend to separate.
So often we focus on mind
work and the intellectual,
spiritual, up there somewhere.
Or we get very emotional
with a hard level of energy.
And we suddenly become gutsy
something more earthly.
But we still think
about the separation.
>>Mind-body problem
essentially is
how do you get from this
fuzzy thing called the thought
to this material
thing called the body?
>>So for me, the great
lesson in my life
was that my mind and my
body are a wholeness.
They're a unity.
And I began this
path of really trying
to find ways of understanding
myself in a deeper way
and reuniting, bringing back
together, mind and body.
>>So what I want to do and
have been doing in research
is to take the
mind and the body,
we put them back together.
What that means is if Ellen
is over here, she's over here.
If she's over here, she's all
of her-- my mind, my body,
my elbows, my toes.
However you want to categorize
me, all of me is moving around.
>>Only part of us are
typically addressed.
So for instance, at
work, only part of us
are allowed to come to work.
In tennis, only, part of
us is getting instruction,
like instruction to our
body versus considering
the whole part of us.
>>Gregory Bateson is this
wonderful thinking mind.
He's a wonderful,
wonderful scientist
with this brilliant mind.
But he was also very
underdeveloped with his body.
He was a person all
head, very little body.
But when we
collaborate together,
he realized he's
missing the body part.
So I used to teach him.
I said well, listen.
In fact, your body needs
to do more thinking.
OK?
And your mind needs
to dance more.
>>Today, people
have done studies
that show that the mind
and the body are connected
and that every thought
we have is instantly
communicated to every
cell in our body.
>>So the earliest
experiment we did on this
was what now call the
Counterclockwise study.
In this study I took elderly
gentleman-- my students
and I took elderly gentleman
to a timeless retreat.
And the retreat was retrofitted
to 20 years earlier.
And what we did was to have
the experimental group live
in that retreat for a week
as if it was 20 years ago.
The past was the present.
They would discuss things
that were happening then,
but they would do it
in the present tense.
And in all ways, it
was for them 1959.
The results were astounding.
They were standing on their
own, in that vision improved,
hearing improved, physical
strength improved.
They looked younger.
But it's even more
astounding when
you recognize that
as you get older,
things are only
supposed to fall apart.
So it's not just
that they got better,
but this is a
group of people who
is not supposed to get better.
>>We all have
tremendous powers to tap
into our own inner pharmacy.
And by that, I mean
the power we have
to work with our own thoughts.
Thoughts are biochemical
and neurotransmitter events
in our brain.
So we have the ability to
create exactly the kind
of prescription that
we want for ourselves
by choosing our
thoughts more carefully.
>>Most people know, for example,
that placebos are very, very
effective-- so effective
that before you
can bring a drug to market, it
has to outperform the placebo.
>>In the medical
profession, be it
from drugs or surgery or any
other modality, one third
of all healing guaranteed
to be due to the belief
of the patient,
the placebo effect.
>>So the Medical world is
often not happy with placebos,
because it means
that this medicine,
it is no better than a placebo.
And people overlook just
how effective placebos are.
Here you're taking
a drug that's inert.
Well, if you get better,
it's clearly not because
of the drug, because
the drug is inert.
So somehow you're
making yourself better.
>>A positive thinking
can enhance our life.
And negative thinking can
actually cause disease
and can actually cause death.
A scientific name for the
negative side of this point
coin is called
the nocebo effect.
>>So when people have
negative thoughts,
when they have chronic
anxiety or depression,
they're much more
susceptible to illness,
sometimes twice as
susceptible to colds and flus
and that sort of thing.
And we found that
traumatic events
can have a traumatic effect
on the body, even shrinking
parts of the brain, that
they don't develop properly.
So like the hippocampus
in the brain
has been demonstrated
to be affected
by sexual abuse in women
and war trauma in men.
So these are pretty dramatic
demonstrations of the effect
that the body and the
mind have on each other.
>>You can recover from
a terminal illness
with a placebo effect.
A nocebo effect can take
a perfectly healthy person
and kill them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>We're here at the top
of a mountain right now.
And we're looking down over
this vast county of Santa Cruz.
And from up here, I
have a state of calm.
That's my center.
And I can look out there and
I can see everything going on.
I can see the chaos below.
But I can get clarity
by being up here alone,
away from it all.
That's the center.
The key is to be down there away
from this wonderful ashram-like
effect, go down, and function
at a high level with all
the chaos.
>>How do you find your center?
Simple.
Look at the human body.
Where is the center point
of your uprightness?
It's right in the lower
belly, below my belt.
And in Chinese we
call this [CHINESE].
It literally means the
field, the reservoir
of your vital essence.
And the Hindu language
will be the lower chakra.
And then American,
everyday, it's your gut.
It's your gut-level energy.
It's from the belly.
Sometimes we do
things from our heart,
which is on this upper level.
Sometimes we think up here.
In the West, we tend
to be more up here.
We are more intellectual.
We tend to be more up here.
Sometimes we can
be very emotional
from the so-called
feeling place.
But look at me here.
It's still a little
bit too high,
which is part of being human.
But if you really want to find
center, you got to go deeper.
Go to your gut.
Go to this place
below the navel.
>>If there's a wholeness,
than there's a center to that
wholeness.
And I find that it's helpful to
tune into your body and notice
where's your center at
any particular moment.
And often, it's a feeling
of energy in your body.
It could be a feeling
of anxiety in your body.
And if that center of
energy is up in your head,
then you know you're
up in your head.
That center of energy
is in your heart,
you know you're really
feeling in your heart.
If that center of energy
is down in your belly,
you know you're feeling
centered in your body.
>>The center is a moving center.
Like at one moment, I might
be physically centered.
I should always be
physically centered.
And if my mind is in
my feet, so to speak,
is the way I used to say
it, my mind is rooted
and I'm always
experiencing my feet,
then everything else
for me falls into place.
>>If you're waking
up in the morning,
then you're very
heavy in your head.
So your center
could be your head.
Or you could have deep emotions
in the hole in your chest.
You're losing the wonderful
place of your centering, which
is in the center of your body.
Then what happens?
Then what happens is that
all of your movements
are very sluggish.
The blood doesn't
flow as well as it
should flow to your cells.
And that's where many disease
are starting to occur.
Then what happens is that the
bacteria starts to eat you,
instead of you benefiting from
the bacteria in your body.
Then the virus is overcoming
your immune system.
So your immune system
attacking the viruses.
Many things are happening
when you're not centered.
>>So I think we all know
what the idea of centering
would be physically.
If we're moving, we'd
want to be balanced.
And then that would
require being centered
in terms of our
center of gravity,
making sure that we
have a firm foundation
so that our center is supported
so that we can be balanced.
This is actually a crucial
element in all sports
and performing
well in all sports.
I think equally important is
centering in terms of the mind.
And if you imagine that
our mind is normally
chattering quite a bit and
constantly talking to us,
I think centering
in terms of the mind
would be having a
still or quiet mind.
>>So when you have
a centered presence,
basically it means
that you're present.
You're present to
others and your present
to the environment.
It means that you're
open to possibilities
and your body's open
to possibilities.
And you're connected--
present, open, and connected.
And you're connected
at the same time
to what matters to you,
what your values are, what
your vision is, what
your ethics are.
And by staying
connected to yourself
that way, then your
actions will be,
I think, not only more
skillful, but also
be more intended
and more focused.
>>Can you think of
the amount of time
we spend in an accumulative way
in a lifetime stuck in traffic.
What if every moment that
you used as a traffic light,
instead of getting frustrated
because it's a red light,
it's a centering light.
It's an opportunity
to become helpful.
Months in a lifetime, 24/7.
Better than a monastery.
There you are.
It's accumulative.
We can do this.
>>I think emotionally
there's a centering as well,
which is, in my opinion,
the center of emotion
is acceptance.
It's really just
accepting who we are,
accepting what our
capabilities are.
And of course, all of that
connects with the other thing
you mentioned, which is
being in the here and now.
>>I remember teaching several
multiple sclerosis patients
of mine to start and walk
and focus on their center.
And it was really wonderful to
see how the focus on the center
helps them walk better.
If they can already
walk, but they're limping
and they focus on the center,
they will always walk better.
>>Periodically
throughout the day.
Maybe it's when you
put your seat belt on.
Maybe it's a light.
Maybe it's when you
boot up your computer.
You're not booting
up your computer.
You're booting up
also your center.
Maybe when you're
washing the dishes,
you're not just
scrubbing the pot,
you're scrubbing your soul.
All of these are
incredible opportunities.
>>I myself found in skydiving
this amazing relationship
to being centered, which
allowed me to really be relaxed.
In the midst of that relaxation,
I didn't have any tension,
and I could really be present.
Something went wrong right, I
just could easily address that.
But for the most part,
things don't go wrong.
Everything goes right.
And you're free.
I'm hurdling towards the
Earth at 125 miles an hour,
and I'm laughing,
and I'm playing.
>>At any time, can
we get more aligned?
Absolutely.
Can we begin working
with our breath?
Absolutely.
Can we begin making distinction?
See, people can do this.
But they don't.
We need to start understanding
that in your daily life,
putting periodically
moments when you do this,
it will shift entirely
how you not only think--
your neurological
pathways over time--
but your emotional
intelligence--
how you actually operate.
You start to shift
your neurology.
Magic begins to happen.
We can either expand
our energy at any given
time at a cellular level,
or we can contract it.
When we contract and hold,
we become that dead branch.
Life starts to go out.
Health problems start to occur.
>>Too much inwardness
makes your contraction,
makes you close in.
Too much outwardness, you
lose yourself out there.
So tai chi is the balance
between the outward you
and internal you.
In Chinese, we say,
[CHINESE] out there
and [CHINESE] in here in one
complete yin yang gesture.
There's no difference.
It's a continuity
of how to bring
the external self into yourself.
Within yourself, you need to
allow the expansion happen.
>>Extending is this
capacity to allow
your energy, your
[FOREIGN LANGUAGE], your chi,
your elan vital, your attention
to flow out of your body.
And then by flowing
out of your body,
it becomes like a receptor
where you can not only
touch other things and other
sensitive beings will feel
that touch, but also it's a way
that you can listen to others.
So by extending your attention
out, what you're doing
is a commitment to
a deeper listening.
>>You just mentioned Al
Huang, Chungliang Al Huang,
and I workshopped with him many
years ago, 10 or 15 years ago.
He has a great story.
He talked about his wife
had learned as a dancer
to, when she's doing
the plie, the instructor
had told her, think
about squeezing
a dime between your
cheeks as you're going.
So he presented that to us.
And then he said the key to
everything we're talking about
is drop the dime, drop the dime.
And so that's physically
we have to drop the dime.
We have to release and let go.
But we have to do that
mentally and emotionally.
>>If you feel trapped
inside, all you have to do
is just open yourself
up physically.
Open your eyes.
Open your chest.
Open your arms.
The body is such a
transparent language.
If you feel trapped, you
continue to think expansion
without opening your
arms, open your shoulders,
you will be trapped forever.
Physically, you need to
trust you need to expand.
>>When we feel somebody walk
into our room, our office,
our home, and they're
very contracted,
our tendency is to contract.
And then we get further apart.
And when we begin to
contract, if that's our habit,
they contract.
>>So when people, their heart
is closed, their mind is closed,
they are contracted
into a little me.
The little me looks like
this physically, emotionally.
>>People would look
at me or look at what
in going they're not
comfortable in themself.
They're at fight.
They're a struggle
with something.
I would say in the West, our
common-sense idea of relaxation
is you have a Bud, and you're
lying on the couch, Saturday
morning or Saturday noon
or something like that.
>>One of the things
that makes me laugh
is when people give
you the meditation.
Now you relax.
And you relax more.
We start connective tissue.
With tense muscle, you sit
down, and you believe that.
Truth is, you have to
really open up in your body.
>>That means that you're in
harmony with the field gravity.
You're not fighting gravity.
So if I'm doing this,
or if I'm doing this,
or if I'm tightening my
jaw, or holding my breath,
or leaning forward, or leaning
away, I'm fighting gravity.
>>You have to be aware
of your breathing.
And you have to be
aware of the blood flow.
And you have to be aware
of your whole system.
When you're aware of all of
that, when you give yourself
all that you deserve to have
in life, you'll be centered.
>>We need to take
moments, just becoming
more aware and present,
to start expanding
our mind at the highest level.
It's expanding our energy.
It's literally
beginning to breathe
in not a hope, but
our highest qualities.
What qualities can you
breathe in right now.
If you're going to work, and
you're at a centering light,
as I mentioned, and
you get present,
now start engaging your mind.
Breathe in the
qualities you need.
What do you need at work?
Be the best team player you
can, to be very enthusiastic,
to be creative, to have energy.
Breathe it in now.
Let it penetrate into the cells.
On the exhalation, breathe
it out to the world.
We're starting to give
our minds something
to think about, except
instead of letting
it dwell on the same
thoughts we had yesterday
and the day before, which
is basically judgmental,
past-future thinking.
>>When you want to get
out of this little place,
simply open up.
Open your eyes, look around.
Open your heart.
Open your mind.
And suddenly you are different.
>>There are enough
experiments that
were done that are
showing that there
is electricity in the body.
And of course, the
biologists don't
want to hear about
it, because that
means they're going to
have to restudy biology.
But it's up to them, and
hopefully this documentary
can change that.
>>Every human cell or
every biological cell
is by definition a battery.
And it's because the
outside of the cell
has a positive potential,
and inside the cell,
just under the membrane if
you put in an electrode,
is a negative potential.
So every cell has a small
amount of voltage to it.
And we're emitting this
force by summoning up
the energy through exercises
to milk the 50 trillion cells
and then make a current that
can run through the body.
>>Many years ago, when I
was teaching at University
of California, and we had
a kinesiology department,
we had some Russian scientists
doing research on energy.
And they would film
my tai chi class.
The first week we were doing
the tai chi movement, only
a little bit aura.
Second week, the
aura gets bigger.
By third week, the aura
is huge around the body.
So even scientifically
we can find proof
about the transmission of chi.
It's real.
>>When I was in the
Philippines, a healer
put his hand through my body.
Actually, several of them did.
Now, we would say,
well, that can't be,
because the body's solid.
But it's not, it it?
It's vibrations.
And the difference between
myself and the Filipino healer
is he absolutely knows that.
He doesn't think it.
It's not a good idea.
It's not a philosophy.
If life is energy, if it's all
matter, energy interchangeable,
it is flowing.
As we participate
in that process,
we start to recognize
that what we
see as a problem, an object in
front of us, is simply energy.
And instead of this kind of
feeling, this push versus push,
we start-- as I do in my
practicing in the martial arts,
like with Aikido--
you start to practice
having this come at you.
And instead of pushing
back and getting run over,
you engage the energy of it.
There's a confluence
that takes place.
And that confluence allows
you to be more powerful.
>>Well, in the 5
Rhythms, we talk about
in the flowing rhythm to
really let the dance in,
to be receptive.
In the staccato rhythm, to let
go of whatever, to let it out,
to let the dance come out,
to let your expression out.
In the chaos rhythm, to really
let go, to just totally let go.
And in the lyrical rhythm,
it's letting go of letting go.
>>There's a place in life.
Let's draw.
Here it is.
It's a box.
And when you're inside that
box, everything goes right.
When you get outside of
it, things go haywire.
So the zone is a place.
It's not just an emotional,
mental, psychological space.
It's a spiritual space.
It's a place where we
demonstrate qualities
like courage and
fearlessness, tenacity.
We're willing to suffer.
We're willing to become
comfortable with being
uncomfortable.
When you have all of
these qualities going on
simultaneously, we get
to a very special place.
We're not judging this place.
What we're doing is we're
going with the flow.
Going with the flow allows us
to think less with our minds
and think with our bodies.
Our body has a lot of
stored-up, built-in,
what I want to call
physical intelligence.
And this physical intelligence
performs perfectly well
without our mind interfering.
Let go of the need to control
the outcome and the results
and the points.
And focus in on your
little things in life,
whether it's business
or in the family
or on the basketball court.
And when you do,
all of a sudden,
you will magically
take off into a place
where you won't even
realize you are.
And the minute you realize you
are there, you'll be out of it,
because now you're focusing on
something completely different.
>>What that zone
state is ultimately,
I think, is a taste
of your higher self.
I think there's a level
of consciousness within us
that feels great.
And when we're there, everybody
describes it very similar.
When we're in an activity
where the goal is clear
and it's challenging
us, taking us
to the edge of our capabilities,
but we still feel capable,
like we can do it-- these
seem to be the conditions
for entering this state
of being in which we're
highly focused, very
absorbed in what we're doing.
>>Some people talk about
being in the zone as if that's
a special thing that
happens only sometimes
when you're playing ball or
something, or basketball.
And all of a sudden--
boy, I found that zone.
>>But it's been proven
over and over again
that people can enter that
zone state in any activity.
>>Play is the most
professional thing we can do.
Look at all of the people
who've done great things.
It's as if they're
at play, isn't it?
What's the high
definition of play?
Heightened awareness,
increased depth of connection.
That's the definition.
Who you want to work and
live with-- people trying
to be perfect, or people
that are highly aware, deeply
connected?
That's the play state.
>>And children are
so great at this.
And I love watching kids
playing in a sandbox,
focusing in on all the little
things, the little details.
They don't hear me.
I can call them.
They don't hear a word.
They're right there
in the moment.
That's in the now.
That's in the moment.
I want to imitate
their being in the now.
>>The Germans call it [GERMAN].
>>In Chinese we call
[CHINESE]-- sudden awareness.
And translated into Japanese,
it's called satori in zen.
>>Where you dive into play
and you're so absorbed in what
you're doing that you can't
hear your name being called.
>>If we do the things that
we have researched now
on mindfulness, and allow
themselves to actively
be there noticing
new things, that life
will be lived in the zone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>We are waking up to have the
aha moment, to be in the here
and now, to be totally
aware of are nowness.
And that's the true aha.
>>When you notice new things,
then you become aware.
Gee, I didn't know it as
well as I thought I did.
And that uncertainty
leads you to notice more.
And that's the way to
stay in the present.
>>When you become mindful,
conscious, present, that's
where you're
controlling live time.
And when you control it, you
manifest a different experience
than when your
subconscious is doing it.
So the whole lesson says, how
do you create heaven on earth?
How do you get in harmony?
How do you get in alignment?
And the answer is, don't let
the subconscious run the show.
Be here, and be here now.
And then you have why--
you have your hands
on the control when the
conscious mind is present.
>>The results across 35
years worth of research
says that in doing
this very simple thing,
you will be happier.
You will be more competent.
Other people will see
you as more charismatic.
Your health will be better.
And you'll live longer.
>>We can age well in a way that
is beyond one's imagination.
Look, there was the guy who
wrote the book "The Mighty
Atom."
You know, he died at age of 105.
Shame on him it was that early.
And until the last
week of his life,
I heard he ran for
five miles a day.
He could do that.
What can't you do?
>>But there's a certain
amount of ourselves
that has to truly be
ready, to really want
to get on that dance floor and
overcome one's own inhibitions
and self-consciousness to
go ah, I'm going to show up.
I'm going to be here, no
matter how uncomfortable it is.
I want to sine.
I deserve.
I was born to shine
in this world.
And even if that's just on this
little dance floor in New York
City, or somewhere in Kansas
on this little dance floor,
or just in this little
family, just being a mother.
I'm going to shine.
>>And I think it's
really in those moments
that we allow ourselves
to wake up, wake
up fully through our
whole nervous system,
our entire spirit, if you will.
We awake fully, and
then we experience
even washing the dishes,
or changing the diapers,
or caught in traffic is that
there's universes and worlds
and worlds that we can
interact in during that time.
>>If you have someone that you
really admire, some athlete,
you'll notice that what you
admire most about that person
is that their heart,
that they play with hear,
they compete with heart.
>>You know how
people on occasion
envy those who seem
to have a passion?
Those are people who
are mindfully engaged.
>>You love what you do.
Everything you do, you
put your heart into it.
>>That's why Einstein-- I'm sure
he didn't get up in the morning
and go, uh, I got to
go to work and deal
with that stupid
relativity thing.
That was his idea.
He wanted to actually figure
out the theory of relativity.
I'm sure he dreamed
about it at night.
I'm sure he woke up in the
morning excited, fascinated,
and wanted to discover that.
Picasso didn't get up and
go, I got to go paint again.
>>Every time a champion
goes out and plays,
whether they win or not,
they're playing and competing
with heart.
>>In Chinese, we
have only one symbol.
Xin literally means
heart mind combined.
We do not have a separation
between heart, the feeling
heart and the thinking mind.
>>A client of mine who was so
obsessed-- he was a runner.
He's a runner.
And he was very obsessed
with the time, his time,
no matter what happened--
workouts, races.
And he'd constantly be
looking at his watch.
And he'd have a heart monitor.
he'd look at time.
He'd be listening.
He wanted to know how
many beats per whatever.
And he went through
this whole thing.
And then I remember on
one run-- I went out
with him actually on this run.
And he had to stop in
the middle of the run,
because he wanted
to check his watch
and see what was going on.
So I gave a suggestion.
I said, what time is it?
And he goes like this.
And he looked at his watch,
and he said, it's 11:13.
OK, great.
I said, what I want you to do
is I want you to take that watch
and put it away.
[PHONE VIBRATING]
We took the glass off the
watch and the numbers.
And I put a piece of paper,
and I wrote in red N-O-W.
I said to him, what
time is it now?
>>[INAUDIBLE]
>>The very next
race that he ran,
he didn't even wear a watch.
He didn't wear the watch with
now or any watch with anything.
>>The normal way we go
about our life in battle
isn't who we really are.
You can discover your real self.
And it's important to
even know that it's there.
>>He ran through that race.
And he ran his absolute
best time for the marathon.
And he broke his personal
best by about six minutes.
>>We're way more
than we think we are.
And the discovery of that self,
I think, is the true gain.
>>Speaking, teaching,
parenting, doesn't matter.
It's all the same.
[MUSIC PLAYING]